New chapter for designing new communities (for the collaboration guide) (#1255)
alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way: book/website/collaboration/new-community/new-community-guide.md

# Guide to Planning a Community

What if you started a project with a thought like, “I have this great idea that I want to try on this public data!”?
There is nothing to worry about if you’re the only one working on it.
However, if you want to develop this project - you become responsible for making people feel included in your project.

As a 'project lead', you want to set up a welcoming and inclusive environment and create the first set of visions and goals for your collaborators.
You can not assume that everyone you collaborate with knows what is expected of them when they start to work with others on your project.
Therefore it’s important to set the right expectations from the beginning for your community, even though you might not have planned on having one (see more details: {cite}`Sharan2020Apr`).

## A checklist for planning collaboration in your project

The checklist below will help you in making the process of establishing collaboration in your research project thoughtfully in a structured manner.

> The practices listed here are derived from and limited by the experiences of the authors who participate in several successful Open Research communities and lead community-driven projects such as [The Carpentries](https://carpentries.org), [Mozilla Open Leaders](https://mozilla.github.io/open-leadership-training-series/), [Open Life Science](openlifesci.org/) and _The Turing Way_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The practices listed here are derived from and limited by the experiences of the authors who participate in several successful Open Research communities and lead community-driven projects such as [The Carpentries](https://carpentries.org), [Mozilla Open Leaders](https://mozilla.github.io/open-leadership-training-series/), [Open Life Science](https://openlifesci.org/) and _The Turing Way_.
```

The OLS link wasn't rendering.

While reading this chapter, please be aware that you may need to make adjustments for the projects that may be very different in nature (for example, not entirely open source).

### 1. Choose a communication platform

> - When leading an open project, use collaborative and open platforms such as [GitHub](http://github.com/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When leading an open project, use collaborative and open platforms such as [GitHub](http://github.com/) or [GitLab](https://about.gitlab.com/).
```

Just to add an alternative 🙃

Reviewer: (I added this because there was an alternative to Slack included, but the rest of the subchapter focuses on GitHub, so you don't also need to include GitLab.)

> - Evaluate the need for any real-time communications such as if a text chat system like [Slack](https://slack.com) or [Riot/Matrix](https://about.riot.im/free) will be useful or a mailing list be sufficient (read details {ref}`Communication Channels <cm-os-comms-channels>`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Evaluate the need for any real-time communications, such as if a text chat system like [Slack](https://slack.com) or [Riot/Matrix](https://about.riot.im/free) will be useful or if a mailing list will be sufficient (read details {ref}`Communication Channels <cm-os-comms-channels>`).
```

  - Consider a separate internal communication platform for your community members and an external one for showing what you’ve done to the rest of the world.

> - A [Twitter account](twitter.com/) or a simple website (such as on [Git pages](https://pages.github.com/)) can be useful external platforms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A [Twitter account](twitter.com/) or a simple website (such as on [GitHub pages](https://pages.github.com/)) can be useful external platforms.
```

- Make sure that the choices of these platforms are made to ensure that there is a low barrier to join them.

### 2. Provide a project summary file:

> - The first document in your project should be a project summary file, which on GitHub repository will be a [README.md file](https://help.github.com/en/github/creating-cloning-and-archiving-repositories/about-readmes).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The first document in your project should be a project summary file, which in a GitHub repository will be a [README.md file](https://help.github.com/en/github/creating-cloning-and-archiving-repositories/about-readmes).
```

- This will provide basic information about your project so that people can evaluate why your project will be interesting for them.

>   - Here is [a template](https://gist.github.com/PurpleBooth/109311bb0361f32d87a2) by the GitHub user [PurpleBooth](https://gist.github.com/PurpleBooth).

Reviewer: I can't ever get that gist to load (do other people have the same problem?). If it's just on my end, then please ignore this. Otherwise, should it point to the GitHub repo template instead (instead of the gist?): https://github.com/PurpleBooth/a-good-readme-template, e.g.:
```suggestion
  - Here is [a template](https://github.com/PurpleBooth/a-good-readme-template) by the GitHub user [PurpleBooth](https://github.com/PurpleBooth).
```

- Whenever you update your code of conduct, invite comments from your members to ensure that their concerns are addressed.
  - This can be done on [GitHub issues](https://help.github.com/en/github/managing-your-work-on-github/about-issues), or [Pull Requests](https://help.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests/about-pull-requests).

### 4. Provide contribution guidelines and interaction pathways:

- A thoughtful guideline helps people decide which pathway they can choose to contribute to your project, or if at all they want to be in your community.
- Make sure that your community interactions and different pathways to contribute are open, inclusive, and clearly stated.
  - If people can’t figure out how to contribute they will drop off without help.
- Value different types of contributions - coding projects are not only about code, therefore list documentation and other management skills as well.

> - You can use {ref}`Persona Creation Tool<pd-persona-creation>` or [Persona and Pathway exercise](https://mozillascience.github.io/working-open-workshop/personas_pathways/) to brainstorm who could be your possible community members.

Reviewer: Add a link to the new _Turing Way_ chapter on personas? 🙃

Author: This should do the trick: {ref}`Persona Creation Tool<pd-persona-creation>`

- Provide appropriate incentives and acknowledgment for the contributions made by your community members.
- Create opportunities for members to share some leadership responsibilities with you in the project.
- When inviting suggestions and ideas from the community, provide the first set of plans where your community can develop from.
- See this document from [Open Source Guides](https://opensource.guide/leadership-and-governance/) for reference.

### 6. Provide contact details wherever useful:

- Clarifying responsibilities for different members will allow people to reach out to the right person with any query.
- Add details of the designated contact persons for technical problems, leadership questions, or any report on the Code of Conduct.
- This will be particularly useful if something needs immediate resolution.

### 7. Identify failed approaches, and stop them:

- Development happens in an iterative manner, therefore, revisit your plans and ideas in regular intervals and involve your members in the process.
- Check if there are parallel developments or multiple approaches that should be merged or changed.

> - Fail fast, fail informatively - recognize what isn’t working for your project and stop them for being continued.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fail fast, fail informatively - recognize what isn’t working for your project and stop it from continuing.
```

- For Open Research communities you can maintain transparency when discussing failures and successes but refrain from singling out or blaming others.
- This iterative approach comes from Agile Practices, see these short posts for reference:
  - [The agile concept fail fast gets bad press but is misunderstood](https://www.information-age.com/agile-concept-fail-fast-gets-bad-press-misunderstood-123460434/)
  - [The Beginner’s Guide To Scrum And Agile Project Management](https://blog.trello.com/beginners-guide-scrum-and-agile-project-management)

### 8. Have documentation and dissemination plans for your project:

- With new members joining your project, they must be able to find the information they need without asking you.
- Investing in documentation plans will free you from many communication-related challenges by sharing general information regarding past decisions or the decision making process your project uses.
- A good place to store the documentation is [wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wiki) or similar platforms (like GitHub) where information can be shared transparently and updated by your community members democratically.

> - To disseminate outputs of your project, you should use permanent identifiers that can be shared and cited, for example, [digital object identifier (DOI)](https://www.doi.org/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- To disseminate outputs of your project, you should use persistent identifiers that can be shared and cited, for example, [digital object identifier (DOI)](https://www.doi.org/).
```
